Indication, from Pioneer 10/11, Galileo, and Ulysses Data,
of an Apparent Anomalous, Weak, Long-Range Acceleration+
John D. Anderson,a Philip A. Laing,b Eunice L. Lau,c Anthony S. Liu,d
Michael Martin Nieto,e and Slava G. Turyshevf
a,c,f

Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109
The Aerospace Corporation, 2350 E. El Segundo Blvd., El Segundo, CA 90245-4691
d
Astrodynamic Sciences, 2393 Silver Ridge Ave., Los Angeles, CA 90039
e
Theoretical Division (MS-B285), Los Alamos National Laboratory, University of California, Los Alamos, NM 87545
(November 26, 2024)

arXiv:gr-qc/9808081v2 1 Oct 1998

b

Radio metric data from the Pioneer 10/11, Galileo, and Ulysses spacecraft indicate an
apparent anomalous, constant, acceleration acting on the spacecraft with a magnitude ∼
8.5 × 10−8 cm/s2 , directed towards the Sun. Two independent codes and physical strategies
have been used to analyze the data. A number of potential causes have been ruled out. We
discuss future kinematic tests and possible origins of the signal.
PACS numbers: 04.80.-y, 95.10.Eg, 95.55.Pe
Exploration of the outer planets began with the launch
of Pioneer 10 on 2 March 1972, [1]. (Pioneer 11 followed
on 5 April 1973.) After Jupiter and (for Pioneer 11) Saturn encounters, the two spacecraft followed hyperbolic
orbits near the plane of the ecliptic to opposite sides of
the solar system. Although Pioneer 10 is still transmitting, its mission officially ended on 31 March 1997 when
it was at the distance of 67 Astronomical Units (AU)
from the Sun. Pioneer 11’s radio system failed and coherent Doppler signals were last received on 1 October
1990, when the spacecraft was 30 AU away from the Sun.
The Pioneer spacecraft are excellent for dynamical astronomy studies. Due to their spin-stabilization and their
great distances, a minimum number of Earth-attitude reorientation maneuvers are required. This permits precise
acceleration estimations, to the level of 10−10 cm/s2 (averaged over 5 days). Contrariwise, a Voyager-type spacecraft is not well suited for a precise celestial mechanics
experiment as its numerous attitude-control maneuvers
overwhelm any small external acceleration.
To obtain the S-band Doppler data from the Pioneer
spacecraft, NASA used the Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s
(JPL) Deep Space Network (DSN). This data was used
in the two analyses described below to determine Pioneer’s initial position, velocity and the magnitudes of the
orientation maneuvers. The analyses were modelled to
include the effects of planetary perturbations, radiation
pressure, the interplanetary media, general relativity, and
bias and drift in the range and Doppler. Planetary coordinates and the solar system masses were obtained using
JPL’s Export Planetary Ephemeris DE200. Both analyses calculated Earth’s polar motion and its non-uniform
rotation using the International Earth Rotation Service.
Beginning in 1980, when at 20 AU the solar radiation
pressure acceleration had decreased to < 5 × 10−8 cm/s2
[2], JPL’s Orbit Determination Program (ODP) analysis of unmodelled accelerations (at first with the faster-

moving Pioneer 10) found that the biggest systematic
error in the acceleration residuals is a constant bias of
aP ∼ (8 ± 3) × 10−8 cm/s2 , directed toward the Sun [3],
to within the accuracy of the Pioneers’ antennae. As
possible “perturbative forces” to explain this bias, we
considered gravity from the Kuiper belt, gravity from
the galaxy, spacecraft “gas leaks,” errors in the planetary ephemeris, and errors in the accepted values of the
Earth’s orientation, precession, and nutation. None of
these “forces” explained the apparent acceleration. Some
were three orders of magnitude or more too small.
Non-gravitational effects, such as solar radiation pressure and precessional attitude-control maneuvers, make
small contributions to the apparent acceleration we have
observed. The solar radiation pressure decreases as r−2 .
As previously indicated for the Pioneers, at distances
>10-15 AU it produces an acceleration that is much less
than 8 × 10−8 cm/s2 , directed away from the Sun. (The
solar wind is roughly a factor of 100 smaller than this.)
A possible systematic explanation of the residuals is
non-isotropic thermal radiation. Pu238 (half life of 87.74
years) radioactive thermal generators (RTGs) power the
Pioneers. At launch the RTGs delivered 160 W of electric power. Power has decreased approximately linearly
ever since. By 1997 a little less than 80 W were available.
The excess power and the heat generated by the plutonium has been thermally radiated into space. The power
needed for this to explain aP is ∼ 85 W. There is almost
that much available, but presumably the radiation was
approximately isotropic. Further, if it were not, and was
the cause of aP , this acceleration would have decreased
with time. After 1980, no such (linearly decreasing) acceleration was observed. Another radiation source is the
Pioneer radio beam. The power emitted from the antenna is 8 W. This implies a bias maximum of less than
9% of aP , and in the opposite direction. (The influence
of the bias is being investigated.)
1

We conclude, from the JPL-ODP analysis, that there
is an unmodelled acceleration, aP , towards the Sun
of (8.09 ± 0.20) × 10−8 cm/s2 for Pioneer 10 and of
(8.56±0.15)×10−8 cm/s2 for Pioneer 11. The error is determined by use of a five-day batch sequential filter with
radial acceleration as a stochastic parameter subject to
white Gaussian noise (∼ 500 independent five-day samples of radial acceleration) [4,5]. No magnitude variation
of aP with distance was found, within a sensitivity of 2
× 10−8 cm/s2 over a range of 40 to 60 AU.
Continuing our search for an explanation, we considered the possibilities i) that the Pioneer 10/11 spacecraft
had internal systematic properties, undiscovered because
they are of identical design, and ii) that the acceleration
was due to some not-understood viscous drag force (proportional to the approximately constant velocity of the
Pioneers). Both these possibilities could be investigated
by studying spin-stabilized craft whose spin axes are not
directed towards the Sun, and whose orbital velocity vectors are far from being radially directed.
Two candidates were Galileo in its Earth-Jupiter mission phase and Ulysses in Jupiter-perihelion cruise out of
the plane of the ecliptic. As well as Doppler, these spacecraft also yielded a considerable quantity of range data.
Ranging data are generated by cross correlating a phase
modulated signal with a ground duplicate and noting the
time delay. Thus, the ranging data are independent of
the Doppler data, which represent a frequency shift of
the radio carrier wave without modulation. (For example, solar plasma introduces a group delay in the ranging
data but a phase advance in the Doppler data.) Ranging
data can be used to distinguish an actual range change
from a fictitious one caused by a frequency error.
A quick look at Galileo showed it was impossible to
separate the solar radiation effect from the anomalous
constant acceleration with the limited data analyzed (241
days from 8 January 1994 to 6 September 1994) [6].
However, an analysis of the radiation pressure on
Ulysses in its out-of-the-ecliptic journey, from 5.4 AU
near Jupiter in February 1992 to the perihelion at 1.3 AU
in February 1995, found a varying profile with distance
[7]. The orbit solution requires a periodic updating of the
solar radiation pressure. The radio Doppler and ranging
data can be fit to the noise level with a time-varying
solar constant in the fitting model [8]. The inferred solar constant is about 40 percent larger at perihelion (1.3
AU) than at Jupiter (5.2 AU), a physical impossibility.
By interpreting this time variation as a true r−2 solar
pressure plus a constant radial acceleration, we conclude
that Ulysses was subjected to an unmodelled acceleration
towards the Sun of (12 ± 3) ×10−8 cm/s2 .
With no explanation of this data in hand, our attention focused on the possibility that there was some error in JPL’s ODP. To investigate this, an independent
analysis of the raw data using The Aerospace Corporation’s Compact High Accuracy Satellite Motion Pro-

gram (CHASMP), which was developed independently
of JPL’s ODP, was performed. Although by necessity,
both programs use the same physical principles, planetary ephemeris, and timing and polar motion inputs, the
algorithms are otherwise quite different. If there were an
error in either program, they would not agree. (Common
program elements continue to be investigated.)
The CHASMP analysis of Pioneer 10 data also showed
an unmodelled acceleration in a direction along the radial
toward the Sun [9]. The value is (8.65 ± 0.03) × 10−8
cm/s2 , agreeing with JPL’s result. The smaller error
here is because the CHASMP analysis used a batch leastsquares fit over the whole orbit [4], not looking for a
variation of the magnitude of aP with distance.
Without using the apparent acceleration, CHASMP
shows a steady frequency drift of about −6 × 10−9 Hz/s,
or 1.5 Hz over 8 years (one-way only). This equates to a
clock acceleration, −at , of −2.8×10−18s/s2 . The identity
with aP is aP ≡ at c. The drift in the Doppler residuals
(observed minus computed data) is seen in Figure 1. It
is clear, definite, and cannot be removed without either
the added acceleration, aP , or the inclusion in the data
itself of a frequency drift, i.e., a “clock acceleration” at .
If there were a systematic drift in the atomic clocks of
the DSN or in the time-reference standard signals, this
would appear like a non-uniformity of time; i.e., all clocks
would be changing with a constant acceleration. We have
not yet been able to rule out this possibility. Elements
common to the Doppler and range tracking systems (e.g.,
DSN station clocks) need to be investigated. For example, how and to what accuracy are the clocks at different
DSN stations tied to each other and to external national
standards? Are there differences in the orbital fits when
different stations’ data are analyzed separately?
Aerospace’s analysis of Galileo data covered the same
arc as JPL and a second arc from 2 December 1992 to
24 March 1993. Doppler data from the first arc resulted
in a determination for aP of ∼ (8 ± 3) × 10−8 cm/s2 , a
value similar to that from Pioneer 10. But the correlation
with solar pressure was so high (.99) that it is impossible
to decide whether solar pressure is a contributing factor.
[Galileo is less sensitive to both the aP - and at -model
effects than the Pioneers. Pioneers have a smaller solar
pressure and a longer light travel time. Sensitivity to a
clock acceleration is proportional to the light travel time
squared.] The second arc was 113 days long, starting six
days prior to the second Earth encounter. This solution
was also too highly correlated with solar pressure, and
the data analysis was complicated by many mid-course
maneuvers. The maneuver uncertainties were so great, a
standard null result could not be ruled out.
However, there was an additional result from this second arc. This arc was chosen for study because there
was ranging data. The two-way range change and time
integrated Doppler are consistent to ∼ 4 m over a time
interval of one day. This is strong (but not conclusive)
2

evidence that the apparent acceleration is not the result
of hardware problems at the tracking stations.
With these added discoveries, what other possible origins for the signal come to mind?
One can speculate that there is some unknown interaction of the radio signals with the solar wind. An experimental answer could be given with two different transmission frequencies. Although the main communication
link on the Ulysses mission is S-up/X-down mode, a small
fraction of the data is S-up/S-down. We plan to utilize
this option in further analysis.
If no normal explanation for the residuals is found, further tests of the effect are needed. The weakening Pioneer
10 signal can still be reacquired for a short time. (The
NASA/Ames Lunar Prospector Team has intermittently
done this for training purposes, producing high quality
data.) Further Ulysses data would also help.
The Pluto Express mission could provide an excellent
opportunity for high-quality data from very deep space,
especially if optical tracking is used. A similar opportunity may exist, out of the plane of the ecliptic, from the
proposed Solar Probe mission. Under consideration is a
low-mass module to be ejected during solar fly by.
With all the above, it is interesting to speculate on the
possibility that the origin of the anomalous signal is new
physics [10]. This is true even though the probability is
that some “standard physics” or some as-yet-unknown
systematic will be found to explain this “acceleration.”
This probability is of interest in itself, given that we have
found no plausible explanation so far.
The paradigm is obvious. “Is it dark matter or a modification of gravity?” Unfortunately, neither easily works.
If the cause is dark matter, it is hard to understand.
The spherically-symmetric distribution of matter, ρ ∼
r−1 , produces a constant acceleration inside the distribution. For this to cause aP , even only out to 50 AU,
would require the total dark matter to be > 3×10−4M⊙ .
But this is in conflict with the accuracy of the ephemeris,
which allows only of order a few times 10−6 M⊙ of dark
matter even within the orbit of Uranus [11]. (A 3-cloud
neutrino model also did not solve the problem [12].)
Contrariwise, the most commonly studied possible
modification of gravity (at various scales) is an added
Yukawa force [13]. Then the gravitational potential is
V (r) = −GM m[(1 + α)r]−1 [1 + α exp−r/λ ],

an r term in the acceleration.) Eq. (2) is the solution
curve; for example, α = −1 × 10−3 for λ = 200 AU.
It is also of interest to consider Milgrom’s proposed
modification of gravity [14], where a ∝ 1/r2 for some
constant a0 ≪ a and a ∝ 1/r for a0 ≫ a. Depending on
the value of the Hubble constant, we find that a0 ≈ aP .
Of course, there are (fundamental and deep) theoretical problems if one has a new force of the phenomenological types of those above. Even so, the deep-space data
piques our curiosity. However, these and other universalgravitational explanations for the Pioneer effect come up
against a hard experimental wall.
The anomalous acceleration is too large to have gone
undetected in planetary orbits, particularly for Earth and
Mars. NASA’s Viking mission provided radio-ranging
measurements to an accuracy of about 12 m [15,16]. If
a planet experiences a small, anomalous, radial acceleration, aA , its orbital radius r is perturbed by
∆r = −l 6 aA /(GM⊙ )4 → −r[aA /aN ],

where l is the orbital angular momentum per unit mass
and aN is the Newtonian acceleration at r. (The right
value in Eq. (3) holds in the circular orbit limit.)
For Earth and Mars, ∆r is about -21 km and -76 km.
However, the Viking data determines the difference between the Mars and Earth orbital radii to about a 100 m
accuracy, and their sum to an accuracy of about 150 m.
The Pioneer effect is not seen.
Further, a perturbation in r produces a perturbation
to the orbital angular frequency of
∆ω = 2l aA /(GM⊙ ) → 2θ̇[aA /aN ].

(4)

The determination of the synodic angular frequency
ωE − ωM is accurate to 7 parts in 1011 , or to about
5 ms accuracy in synodic period. The only parameter
that could possibly mask the spacecraft-determined aR
is (GM⊙ ). But a large error here would cause inconsistencies with the overall planetary ephemeris [11,17].
We conclude that the Viking ranging data limit any
unmodelled radial acceleration acting on Earth and Mars
to no more than 0.1 × 10−8 cm/s2 . Consequently, if the
anomalous radial acceleration acting on spinning spacecraft is gravitational in origin, it is not universal. That
is, it must affect bodies in the 1000 kg range more than
bodies of planetary size by a factor of 100 or more. This
would be a strange violation of the Principle of Equivalence (PE) [18]. The fact an anomalous signal is not seen
in the analysis of the Viking Lander ranging data gives
us added confidence that the anomaly is not related to
DSN hardware. However, the Viking Lander data have
not been analyzed by either ODP or CHASMP, so we
cannot make a similar claim regarding software errors.
Similarly, the ∆ω results rule out the universality of
the at time-acceleration model. In the age of the universe, T , one would have at T 2 /2 ∼ 0.7 T . (Another

(1)

where α is the new coupling strength relative to Newtonian gravity, and λ is the new force’s range. Since the
radial force is Fr = −dr V (r) = ma, the power series for
the acceleration yields an inverse-square term, no inverser term, then a constant term. Identifying this last term
as the Pioneer acceleration yields
aP = −a1 α[2(1 + α)]−1 [r12 /λ2 ],

(3)

(2)

where a1 is the Newtonian acceleration at distance r1 = 1
AU. (Out to 65 AU there is no observational evidence of
3

unusual possibility is that there is some unknown nonkinematic effect causing a Doppler anomaly.)
Clearly, more analysis, observation, and theoretical
work are called for. Further details will appear elsewhere.
We thank John E. Ekelund, Gene L. Goltz, William
E. Kirhofer, Margaret Medina, William L. Sjogren and
S. Kuen Wong of JPL for their support in obtaining and
understanding DSN Tracking Data. We also thank John
W. Dyer, Alfred S. Goldhaber, Jack G. Hills, Irwin I.
Shapiro, and Richard J. Terrile for many helpful conversations. This work was supported by the Pioneer Project,
NASA/Ames Research Center, and was performed at the
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under contract with NASA. P.A.L. and A.S.L.
acknowledge support by a grant from NASA through the
Ultraviolet, Visible, and Gravitational Astrophysics Program. M.M.N. acknowledges support by the U.S. DOE.

+

Electronic
addresses:
john.d.anderson@jpl.nasa.gova , Philip.A.Laing@aero.orgb ,
eunice@helen.jpl.nasa.govc ,
SZLiu@aol.comd ,
e
mmn@pion.lanl.gov , sgt@zeus.jpl .nasa.govf .
[1] See the special issue of Science, No. 4122, 25 January 1974;
specifically, J. D. Anderson, G. W. Null, and S. K. Wong,
Science 183, 322 (1974).
[2] J. D. Anderson, Quarterly Report to NASA/Ames Research Center, Celestial Mechanics Experiment, Pioneer
10/11, 22 July 1992.
[3] A preliminary discussion of these results appeared in M.
M. Nieto, T. Goldman, J. D. Anderson, E. L. Lau, and J.
Pérez-Mercader, in: Proc. Third Biennial Conference on
Low-Energy Antiproton Physics, LEAP’94, ed. by G. Kernel, P. Krizan, and M. Mikuz (World Scientific, Singapore,
1995), p. 606. Eprint hep-ph/9412234.
[4] B. D. Tapley, in Recent Advances in Dynamical Astronomy,
eds. B. D. Tapley and V. Szebehely (Reidel, Boston, 1973),
p. 396.
[5] All errors are from the covariance matrices associated with
the least–squares analysis [4]. The assumed data errors are
larger than the standard error on the post–fit residuals.
(For example, the Pioneer S–band Doppler error was set
at 1 mm s−1 at a Doppler integration time of 60 s, as opposed to a characteristic chi-squared value of 0.3 mm s−1 .)
Thus, the quoted errors are realistic, not formal, representing an attempt to include systematics and reddening of the
noise spectrum by solar plasma. Any spectral peaks in the
postfit Pioneer Doppler residuals were not significant at a
90 percent confidence level.
[6] For a description of Galileo’s mission see T. V. Johnson, C.
M. Yeats, and R. Young, Space Sci. Rev. 60, 3–21 (1992);
for the trajectory see L. A. D’Amario, L. E. Bright, and
A. A. Wolf, Space Sci. Rev. 60, 22–78 (1992).
[7] T. McElrath, private communication.
[8] T. P. McElrath, S. W. Thurman, and K. E. Criddle, Paper
No. AAS 93-687 (AAS Publications Office, 1993).
[9] P. A. Laing and A. S. Liu. NASA Interim Technical Report,
Grant NAGW-4968, 4 October 1996.

[10] Pioneer 10 yielded other fundamental physics, a photon
rest mass limit. See L. Davis, Jr., A. S. Goldhaber, and M.
M. Nieto, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35, 1402 (1975).
[11] J. D. Anderson, E. L. Lau, T. P. Krisher, D. A. Dicus, D.
C. Rosenbaum, and V. L. Teplitz, Ap. J. 448, 885 (1995).
[12] G. J. Stephenson Jr., T. Goldman, and B. H. J. McKellar,
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 13, 2765 (1998).
[13] M. M. Nieto and T. Goldman, Phys. Rep. 205, 221 (1991);
216, 343 (1992), and references therein.
[14] M. Milgrom, Ann. Phys. (NY) 229, 384 (1994).
[15] R. D. Reasenberg, I. I. Shapiro, P. E. MacNeil, R. B. Goldstein, J. C. Breidenthal, J. P. Brenkle, D. L. Cain, T. M.
Kaufman, T. A. Komarek, and A. I. Zygielbaum, Ap. J.
234, L219 (1979).
[16] J. D. Anderson, J. K. Campbell, R. F. Jurgens, E. L. Lau,
X X Newhall, M. A. Slade III, and E. M. Standish Jr.,
in: Proceedings of the Sixth Marcel Grossmann Meeting on
General Relativity, Part A, ed. H. Sato and T. Nakamura,
(World Scientific, Singapore, 1992), p. 353.
[17] E. M. Standish, X X Newhall, J. G. Williams, and D. K.
Yeomans, in: Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical
Almanac, ed. P. K. Seidelmann (University Science Books,
Mill Valley, CA, 1992), p. 279.
[18] The PE figure of merit is aP /aN . This is worse than
for lab experiments (comparing small objects) or for the
Nordtvedt Effect (large objects) [19]. It again emphasizes
that Earth and Mars do not change positions due to aP .
[19] C. M. Will, Theory and Experiment in Gravitational
Physics, (Rev. Ed.) (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993).

FIG. 1. Two-way Doppler residuals (observed Doppler velocity minus model Doppler velocity) for Pioneer 10 in mm/s
vs. time. Solar system gravity is represented by the Sun and
the planetary systems [17]. [If one adds one more parameter to the model (a constant radial acceleration) the residuals
are distributed about zero Doppler velocity with a systematic
variation ∼ 3.0 mm s−1 on a time scale ∼ 3 months.] The
outliers on the plot were rejected from the fit.

4

400

300

Doppler Velocity (mm/sec)

200

100

0

–100

–200

–300

–400

0

500

1000
1500
2000
Days from 1 Jan 1987 09:00:00

2500

3000

